# Community Level Physiological Profiling

Laboratory for Microbial Ecology
Department of Earth, Ecological and Environmental Sciences
University of Toledo

Community level physiological profiling (CLPP)
Background information
Community level physiological profiling (CLPP) owes its beginnings to the
development of the BIOLOG system in the late 1980s. The system was
developed to identify bacteria of clinical importance by assessing each
bacteriums usage of any of 95 different carbon sources in one microtiter plate.

Distribution of carbon sources in the BIOLOG EcoPlate.

Originally, the principal users of the BIOLOG system were pharmaceutical,
biotech, cosmetics, and medical device companies, as well as labs testing for
diseases of humans, animals and plants, labs performing environmental
monitoring, and companies or organizations involved in production or testing of
food and drink. In the 1990s, environmental researchers realized that useful
physiological data concerning whole communities could be generated by
inoculating mixed microbial assemblages in to the BIOLOG plates and noting the
response of the mixed community to the carbon sources.
Since prokaryotic communities can be considered functional units characterized
by the sum of the metabolic properties of individual bacteria, CLPP represents a
sensitive and rapid method for assessing the potential metabolic diversity of
microbial communities.
Furthermore, the ecological relevance of certain
contaminants such as hydrocarbons, pesticides and metals to soil bacterial

CLPP, 12/2004

1

---

communities can also be assessed. CLPP involves inoculating mixed microbial
communities into BIOLOG-GN (for Gram negative bacteria), -GP (Gram positive),
or -ECO (environmental) microplates that contain 95 (GN and GP plates) or 31
(ECO plates) single carbon sources in addition to a tetrazolium dye. The
utilization of any carbon source by the microbial community results in the
respiration-dependent reduction of the dye and purple color formation that can be
quantified and monitored over time.

Example of a BIOLOG plate inoculated with a dilution of soil and incubated for 48
hours. The purple wells contain carbon sources that were used by the microbial
community. The intensity of the purple coloration indicates the degree of carbon
source usage by the community.

Following an empirically determined incubation period, color patterns in the 96well matrix and intensity (O.D.) of color formation can be used to determine two
parameters to describe the microbial community:
(i)

The average metabolic response (AMR) describes the average
respiration of the C-sources by the microbial community and provides a
single metric by which communities can be compared. The AMR is
calculated as the average of the mean difference between the O.D. of the
C-source-containing wells and the control well.

(ii)

The community metabolic diversity (CMD) is represented by the
number of substrates utilized by the microbial community and is
analogous to community functional richness. CMD is calculated by
summing the number of positive responses (purple-colored wells)
observed following incubation.

Each of these parameters can be plotted over incubation time to provide a
metabolic kinetic of the culturable microbial community (figure below).

CLPP, 12/2004

2

---

CLPP profiles comparing the AMR and CMD of five classes of lake bottom
sediments. Sediment classes: freshly dredged (red line), sampled from open
lake-disposal site (green line), surface stored for 20 years (blue line), 5 years
(brown line) and less than one year (yellow line).

Materials
10 mM phosphate buffer (sterile, pH 7.0)
200 ml milk dilution bottle
Five - 50 ml Falcon tubes
200 and 1000 ul pipettes with tips
Multichannel pipette to deliver 100 ul with tips
Three BIOLOG GN, GP, or one EcoPlate
Sterile plastic multichannel reservoir
-
-
-
-

Wear gloves throughout the entire protocol.
Do not cross-contaminate your samples OR THE SOLUTIONS. Be aware of
your pipette tip.
Work clean, either on fresh blue bench paper, in the hood, or on a freshly
ethanol treated bench top.
Do not use a vortex at any point in this protocol unless specified.

CLPP, 12/2004

3

---

The protocol in brief
Using a dilution of your sample that will generate approximately 105 cfu per 100
ml, you will inoculate a BIOLOG microtiter plate. The plate will be incubated for
one week, during which five measurements of color formation in the wells of the
plate will be taken. The data generated by the measurements will be used to
construct curves describing the AMR and CMD over time.

A. Setting up the dilution series
The dilution series for CLPP is performed exactly the same as for dilution plating.
In fact, refer to your results of the dilution plating experiment to determine the
proper dilution with which to inoculate your BIOLOG plate.
1.

Based on your dilution plate results, determine the dilution of your sample
that will result in approximately 105 cfu in 100 ul of sample.
1a.

This is an important step, as it is necessary to inoculate all
BIOLOG plates with the same number of bacterial per well
to facilitate sample-to-sample comparisons.

Hint: this dilution will likely be three dilutions lower than the one that
resulted in a countable plate in your dilution plating experiments.
For example, assume the 10-6 dilution resulted in 100 cfu on the
plate. Since you plated 100 ul of each dilution, this implies that 100
ul of that dilution contains 100 cfu. It follows that to achieve 105
cfu, you must pick the 10-3 dilution to use for the CLPP experiment.
2.

Perform a serial dilution in sterile 15 ml falcon tubes as in the dilution
plating protocol until you reach the desired dilution necessary to achieve
105 cfu 100 ul. You will need approximately 10 ml of inoculum to fill the
BIOLOG wells, so be sure to adjust your dilutions so that you prepare
approximately 12 ml of inoculum to ensure enough inoculum is available
(dilute 1.2 ml in 10.8 ml at each dilution step).

3.

Dispense the contents of the falcon tube that contains the proper dilution
into a sterile multichannel pipette reservoir.

4.

Remove the cover of a BIOLOG microtitre plate. With a multichannel
pipette, transfer 100 ul of the inoculum from the reservoir into each well of
the plate.

5.

Replace the cover of the plate and label the edge with your name, the
date and sample type.

CLPP, 12/2004

4

---

6.

Place the plate into a plastic container containing moist paper towels and
incubate at 25o C.

B. Measuring the OD of the microtiter plate wells
7.

The activity in the plates is measured using a microplate reader set for
absorbance at 590 nm. You will be shown how to take the first
measurement in class (t = 0) and how the plate reader computer software
works.

8.

Ideally the formation of purple coloration (indicating microbial metabolism
of the 95 carbon sources) in each of the wells is performed every 12-24
hours for one week. In addition to the t=0 reading, we will measure them
four times for you (t = 1d, 2d, 3d, and 6d).

9.

Once all measurements are taken, the files will be converted to excel
spreadsheets and emailed to you. You will be responsible for calculating
and plotting two parameters, the Average Metabolic Response (AMR)
and Community Metabolic Diversity (CMD), described below.

C. Data anlaysis
10.

Calculate the average metabolic response (AMR) and the community
metabolic diversity (CMD) of your sample.
The AMR is calculated by averaging the mean difference between the
O.D. of the C-source-containing wells and the control well.
AMR =

 (O.D.well - O.D.neg ) , where
95

(O.D. well - O.D. neg) is the optical density of each carbon source-
containing well minus the O.D. of the negative control well.
The CMD is calculated by summing the number of positive responses
(purple-colored wells) observed following incubation. A threshold O.D.
must be established above which the purple coloration indicates a usage
of the carbon source by the microbial community. This threshold is
commonly set at O.D. = 0.25.
These values should be calculated for each measurement date and then
graphed as a function of incubation time.

CLPP, 12/2004

5

---

Further reading
Garland, J.L. 1997. Analysis and interpretation of community-level physiological
profiles in microbial ecology. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 24:289-300.
Konopka, A. L. Oliver, and R.F. Turco. 1998. The use of carbon substrate
utilization patterns in environmental and ecological microbiology. Microb. Ecol.
35:103-115.
Lehman, M.R. F.S. Colwell, and J.L. Garland. 1997. Physiological profiling of
indigenous aquatic microbial communities to determine toxic effects of metals.
Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 16:2232-2241.
Preston-Mafham, J., L. Boddy, and P.F. Randerson. 2002. Analysis of microbial
community functional diversity using sole-carbon source utilization profiles - a
critique. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 42:1-14.

CLPP, 12/2004

6

---
